Added CONTRIBUTION.md (#339)
alpha-unito/streamflow: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contribute to StreamFlow

As a first step, get StreamFlow from [GitHub](https://github.com/alpha-unito/streamflow) 
```bash
git clone git@github.com:alpha-unito/streamflow.git
```

Then, you can install all the required packages using the `pip install` command.

```bash
cd streamflow
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Finally, you can contribute at the codebase and install StreamFlow 
```
pip install .
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Continuous Integration
```

> StreamFlow relies on [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) for Continuous Integration and Continuous Distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StreamFlow relies on [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) for Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Distribution (CD).
```

The maintainers take care of the Continuous Distribution (CD). In order to publish a new version of the software on PyPI and Docker Hub distributions, the maintainer only has to augment the version number in the `version.py` file.

Instead, everyone in the community can contribute to the StreamFlow codebase by opening a Pull Request (PR). Many tests are done for the Continuous Integration (CI).
However, it is suggested that some tests be done locally before opening the PR, below it is explained how to do it.

### CWL conformance
StreamFlow complies with the [Common Workflow Language](https://www.commonwl.org/) (CWL) from the 1.0 to 1.2 version.

> You can check if your contribution is still standard compliant with the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check if your PR does not compromise CWL compliance by running the CWL conformance tests suite, using the following command
```

```bash 
make test
```
Otherwise, specific tests with the command
```bash
pytest tests/test_scheduler.py tests/test_data_manager.py
```

StreamFlow has many different connectors, and some tests on these connectors are done. Currently, the tested connectors are local, docker, ssh, Kubernetes, and singularity.
Execute all these tests locally required installed: 
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). It is also required for SSH tests.
- [Singularity](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)
- A local Kubernetes, e.g. [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)

For development goals, it is possible to execute local tests only on some specific connectors using the flag `--deploys`
```bash 
pytest --deploys local,docker,singularity tests/test_remotepath.py
```
However, all the deployments are always checked in the CI tests.

### Code style
StreamFlow supports Python 3.8 to 3.12, so use compatible code features.

The StreamFlow code style is compliant with [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/).
Some automatic style checkers can be installed with
```bash
pip install -r lint-requirements.txt
```

> You can verify that your contribution is compliant with the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify that your PR respects the code style with the following command
```

```bash
make format-check flake8 codespell-check
```

Otherwise, you can apply automatically the suggested changes. Use them carefully because they will write the file back. 
```bash
make format codespell
```

## Contribute to the documentation

### Generate the documentation

> The documentation is written in the reStructuredText markup language, and [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) software is used to generate different output formats. The command below installs all the required packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The documentation is written in the reStructuredText markup language, and the [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) framework is used to generate different output formats. The command below installs all the required packages.
```

# Contribute to StreamFlow

> As a first step, get StreamFlow from [GitHub](https://github.com/alpha-unito/streamflow) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a first step, clone StreamFlow from [GitHub](https://github.com/alpha-unito/streamflow) 
```

```bash
git clone git@github.com:alpha-unito/streamflow.git
```

> Then, you can install all the required packages using the `pip install` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, install all the required packages using the `pip install` command
```

```bash
cd streamflow
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

> Finally, you can install StreamFlow with the following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, install StreamFlow with the following command
```

```
pip install .
```

## Continuous Integration

StreamFlow relies on [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) for Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Distribution (CD).

> The maintainers take care of the CD pipeline. In order to publish a new version of the software on PyPI and Docker Hub distributions, the maintainer only has to augment the version number in the `version.py` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only maintainers take care of the CD pipeline. In order to publish a new version of the software on PyPI and Docker Hub distributions, a maintainer only has to augment the version number in the `version.py` file.
```

Instead, everyone in the community can contribute to the StreamFlow codebase by opening a Pull Request (PR). Running the entire suite of StreamFlow tests is part of the CI pipeline.

> However, it is suggested that some tests be done locally before opening the PR, below it is explained how to do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is also possible (and advisable) to run tests locally before opening a PR, as explained [below](#streamflow-tests).
```

### CWL conformance

> StreamFlow complies with all stable versions of the [Common Workflow Language](https://www.commonwl.org/) (CWL) open standard (1.0, 1.1, 1.2). Plus, it implements the `cwltool:Loop` extension (see [here](https://cwltool.readthedocs.io/en/latest/loop.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StreamFlow complies with all stable versions of the [Common Workflow Language](https://www.commonwl.org/) (CWL) open standard (v1.0, v1.1, and v1.2). Plus, it implements the `cwltool:Loop` extension (see [here](https://cwltool.readthedocs.io/en/latest/loop.html)).
```

You can check if your PR does not compromise CWL compliance by running the CWL conformance tests suite, using the following command
```bash
./cwl-conformance-test.sh
```

### StreamFlow tests

> It is necessary that the contribution not introduce some errors in the current software features.

Reviewer: > It is necessary that the contribution not introduce some errors in the current software features.

Remove this sentence as it is obvious

> Some regression tests are supplied using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.3.x/getting-started.html). Before it is necessary to install the required packages for the testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some regression tests are supplied using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.3.x/getting-started.html). Install the required packages using the following command
```

```bash
pip install -r test-requirements.txt
```

> You can execute all the available tests with the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can execute all the available tests with this command
```

```bash 
make test
```

> Otherwise, specific tests with the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, you can execute only a specific test file. For example. to verify compliance with the `cwltool:Loop` CWL extension you can use the following command
```

```bash

> pytest tests/test_scheduler.py tests/test_data_manager.py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pytest tests/test_cwl_loop.py
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Testing connectors

```

> StreamFlow has many different connectors, and some tests on these connectors are done. Currently, the tested connectors are local, Docker, SSH, Kubernetes, and Singularity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StreamFlow comes with many different connectors OOTB, and some of the tests in the suite are used to verify their behaviour. Currently, the tested connectors are : `local`, `docker`, `ssh`, `kubernetes`, and `singularity`. The plan is to add no regression tests for all connectors.
```

> Execute all these tests locally required installed: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing all these tests requires to instal and configure several software packages: 
```

> - [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). It is also required for SSH tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/), which is required to test the `docker` and `ssh` connectors and the CWL `DockerRequirement` implementation with Docker containers;
```

> - [Singularity](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Singularity](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html), which is required to test the `singularity` connector and the CWL `DockerRequirement` conversion to Singularity containers;
```

> - A local Kubernetes, e.g. [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Kubernetes distribution, e.g. [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/), which is used to test the `kubernetes` connector and the CWL `DockerRequirement` conversion to Kubernetes pods.
```

> For development goals, it is possible to execute local tests only on some specific connectors using the flag `--deploys`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For development purposes, it is possible to execute local tests only on a specific subset of connectors using the flag `--deploys`
```

> For development purposes, it is possible to execute local tests only on a specific subset of connectors using the flag `--deploys`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For development purposes, it is possible to execute local tests only on a specific subset of connectors using the `--deploys` option as follows
```

```bash 
pytest --deploys local,docker,singularity tests/test_remotepath.py
```

> However, all the deployments are always checked in the CI tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, all connectors are always tested in the CI pipeline.
```

### Code style
StreamFlow supports Python 3.8 to 3.12, so use compatible code features.

The StreamFlow code style is compliant with [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/).
Some automatic style checkers can be installed with
```bash
pip install -r lint-requirements.txt
```

You can verify that your PR respects the code style with the following command
```bash
make format-check flake8 codespell-check
```

Otherwise, you can apply automatically the suggested changes. Use them carefully because they will write the file back. 
```bash
make format codespell
```

## Contribute to the documentation

### Generate the documentation

> The documentation is written in the reStructuredText markup language, and the [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) framework is used to generate different output formats. The command below installs all the required packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The documentation is written in the reStructuredText markup language, and the [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) framework is used to generate the HTML pages published on the [StreamFlow website](https://streamflow.di.unito.it/documentation/latest/). At the moment there is no CD for documentation: maintainers manually transfer fiels on the StreamFlow website at every release.

To check your local version of the documentation, first install all the required packages using the following command
```

```bash
cd docs
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

> Generate the documentation in HTML format is done using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then generate the documentation in HTML format with the following command
```

```bash
make html
```

> For more information to generate different formats, use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want, you can also generate documentation in a different format among the ones supported by Sphinx. However, note that StreamFlow officially maintains only the HTML format. For more information on the available documentation formats, use the following command

```

# Contribute to StreamFlow

As a first step, clone StreamFlow from [GitHub](https://github.com/alpha-unito/streamflow)
```bash
git clone git@github.com:alpha-unito/streamflow.git
```

Then, install all the required packages using the `pip install` command

```bash
cd streamflow
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Finally, install StreamFlow with the following command

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

pip install .
```

## Continuous Integration

StreamFlow relies on [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) for Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Distribution (CD).
Only maintainers take care of the CD pipeline. In order to publish a new version of the software on PyPI and Docker Hub distributions, a maintainer only has to augment the version number in the `version.py` file.

Instead, everyone in the community can contribute to the StreamFlow codebase by opening a Pull Request (PR). Running the entire suite of StreamFlow tests is part of the CI pipeline.
However, it is also possible (and advisable) to run tests locally before opening a PR, as explained [below](#streamflow-tests).

### CWL conformance
StreamFlow complies with all stable versions of the [Common Workflow Language](https://www.commonwl.org/) (CWL) open standard (v1.0, v1.1, and v1.2). Plus, it implements the `cwltool:Loop` extension (see [here](https://cwltool.readthedocs.io/en/latest/loop.html)).
You can check if your PR does not compromise CWL compliance by running the CWL conformance tests suite, using the following command
```bash
./cwl-conformance-test.sh
```

### StreamFlow tests

> Some regression tests are supplied using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.3.x/getting-started.html). Install the required packages using the following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some non regression tests are supplied using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.3.x/getting-started.html). Install the required packages using the following command
```

```bash
pip install -r test-requirements.txt
```

Then, you can execute all the available tests with the following command
```bash 
make test
```

Otherwise, you can execute only a specific test file. For example, to verify compliance with the `cwltool:Loop` CWL extension, you can use the following command
```bash
pytest tests/test_cwl_loop.py
```

### Testing connectors

> StreamFlow comes with many different connectors OOTB, and some of the tests in the suite are used to verify their behaviour. Currently, the tested connectors are: `local`, `docker`, `ssh`, `kubernetes`, and `singularity`. The plan is to add no regression tests for all connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StreamFlow comes with many different connectors OOTB, and some of the tests in the suite are used to verify their behaviour. Currently, the tested connectors are: `local`, `docker`, `ssh`, `kubernetes`, and `singularity`. The plan is to add non regression tests for all connectors.
```

- [Singularity](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html), which is required to test the `singularity` connector and the CWL `DockerRequirement` conversion to Singularity containers;
- A Kubernetes distribution, e.g., [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/), which is used to test the `kubernetes` connector and the CWL `DockerRequirement` conversion to Kubernetes pods.

For development purposes, it is possible to execute local tests only on a specific subset of connectors using the `--deploys` option as follows
```bash 
pytest --deploys local,docker,singularity tests/test_remotepath.py
```
However, all connectors are always tested in the CI pipeline.

### Code style
StreamFlow supports Python 3.8 to 3.12, so use compatible code features.

The StreamFlow code style complies with [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/).
Some automatic style checkers can be installed with
```bash
pip install -r lint-requirements.txt
```

You can verify that your PR respects the code style with the following command
```bash
make format-check flake8 codespell-check
```

> Otherwise, you can apply automatically the suggested changes. Use them carefully because they will write the file back. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also apply the suggested changes in bulk with the following command 
```

```bash
make format codespell
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use it carefully as it modifies the target files in place. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove some blank lines here

## Contribute to the documentation

### Generate the documentation
The documentation is written in the reStructuredText markup language, and the [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) framework is used to generate the HTML pages published on the [StreamFlow website](https://streamflow.di.unito.it/documentation/latest/). Currently, there is no CD for documentation: maintainers manually transfer files on the StreamFlow website at every release.

To check your local version of the documentation, first, install all the required packages using the following command
```bash
cd docs
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Then, generate the documentation in HTML format with the following command
```bash
make html
```

If you want, you can also generate documentation in a different format from the ones supported by Sphinx. However, note that StreamFlow officially maintains only the HTML format. For more information on the available documentation formats, use the following command
```bash
make help
```

### Documentation changes

> For any changes to the documentation, it is necessary to update the dedicated test on the CI pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> In particular, the checksum of the documentation in the HTML format is tested to avoid misleading changes when new Sphinx versions are released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The checksum of the documentation in HTML format is tested in the CI pipeline to avoid unwanted changes when Shpinx or other dependencies are updated.
```

> 

Reviewer: Whenever a commit changes the documentation, it is necessary to update the dedicated test on the CI pipeline.

> The command below displays the new checksum in the shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command below prints the new checksum on the standard output
```

```bash
cd docs

> make get-checksum

Reviewer: Call it just `checksum`

```

> This new checksum must be copied and pasted into the `.github/workflows/ci-tests.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new checksum must coincide with the one in the `.github/workflows/ci-tests.yaml` file, i.e., the value of the `CHECKSUM` environment variable in the `documentation` job
```

> It must replace the value of the environment variable `CHECKSUM` of the job `documentation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
